# How I build motivated teams

> _I can’t simply hire people who are “engaged” and “driven”. Those are behaviors that emerge under just the right circumstances. But I can hire people based on their **motivators**—conditions that matter to them and that my team can actually provide._

<b>I</b> just had a video call with Kevin, a talented engineering manager that used to report to me. After catching up on all the changes and developments in our lives, he mentioned that some people on his team felt like their hiring criteria was missing an importance essence. They wanted to add something akin to “ownership” or “drive” to their candidate evaluation process. Essentially, they wanted to only hire people that would be motivated and engaged on their team.

Kevin asked for my thoughts because I used to be the CTO at this company and helped create their current interview process. My gut reaction was, of course! who wouldn’t want engineers who were engaged and always drove hard to get their projects live? I recalled how we spent nearly two months coming up with an interview process based on competencies. These were a combination of skills and attitudes that we believed would lead someone to be successful for this particular engineering team. We cared a lot about being able to objectively identify the people that were likely to be successful on our team without injecting our personal biases. I remembered how we debated at adding ownership to our set of competencies, but by the end we decided against it because ownership was not actually a competency, and neither was drive nor engagement. These things, I started arguing to Kevin, were emergent behaviors that people have when they care about what they’re doing, when they’re motivated. 

It’s not like people are either  motivated or lazy by their very nature. I knew a brilliant junior engineer that despite his talent, couldn’t work up the energy to learn our codebase or sharpen his skills. But man, you should have seen this guy’s standup comedy routines. He was hilarious. It was just his hobby, but I could tell he must have practiced his delivery and tested his jokes countless times. I’ve personally experienced the whole spectrum of motivation over the years. I had one job early in my career where I surfed so much internet at the office, that if I did more than an hour of actual work I considered that to be a productive day. If someone had interviewed me for ownership or drive during this time in my life and managed to pull an honest answer out of me, they would have concluded that I was a lazy bum that would never accomplish anything meaningful. In my very next job, I started working 6-days a week pulling 11-hour days and coding for at least 9½ of them. I had a 1 hour break for lunch, and spent no more than 30 minutes getting water or taking bathroom breaks. Minutes spent surfing the internet? Exactly zero. Not counting searching for answers on sites like StackOverflow, which was part of my coding work. 

How did this turnabout happen? In the first job I was basically a QA. The work was way below my ability and I was bored out of my mind. I felt horrible about not really working, but I couldn’t bring myself to actually do more than an infinitesimal amount work. The second job was my own startup. I had the ultimate sense of ownership. I cared about it to a degree that few people would ever care about anything that isn’t truly theirs and worked accordingly.

---

## Motivators
Motivation is something people experience based on the circumstances they’re in. And I’ve seen that the circumstances matter to me are often not at all what my friends care about or even peers in similar roles. themselves. So how can I figure out if someone that might join my team is going to be driven as hell or will do just enough to merely get by? 

Thankfully, I’ve noticed some common themes. Some people like solving hard technical problems regardless of the domain. This was me in the first half of my career. Others feel fulfilled by getting behind a juicy purpose like curing cancer. Some get excited about their work through their personal relationships on the team. The more reasons people had to care about their work the more engaged I’ve seen them get. 

So if I really want to hire someone for ownership or drive, I first need to figure out what matters to them. What are the driving forces in their life? And how well does my team align with what matters to this person? Motivation author Dan Pink has a nice video about his findings. And here are some of the common motivators that I’ve seen come across the teams that I’ve managed or been a part of, including the ones I’ve shamelessly stolen from Mr Pink :-)

### Developing Mastery
Most people, particularly the engineers I've known, enjoy perfecting a particular skill and then using that skill in the world. This could be anything from learning all the ins and outs of Ruby on Rails to building deep intuition around distributed systems. Or it could be slowly building up mastery in people management like you might be doing by reading this post and I’m trying to do by writing it.

 I used to work at a social network Tagged. In my days there it was the 3rd largest network after MySpace and Facebook and we only had 20 engineers. Many of the engineers there were embarrassed about the product because the site members mainly used it for flirting and it had an almost “soft core porn” feel to it. But I loved it. Not the product, but the work. I specifically joined Tagged because it had a massive ratio of users to engineers. I was only 2 years out of college and I had a ton of responsibility on my shoulders. I loved building the crazy complex services to deal with the challenges of scale.

### Social Good / Purpose
The more that someone cares about what their company is trying to achieve, the better I’ve seen them feel about their day to day work. Maybe they have an uncle or grandmother that got a mortgage they couldn’t understand or afford and lost everything during the financial crisis, and now they’re on a mission to simplify consumer finance for deeply personal reasons. I would have loved to hire that person when I was at Clara Lending. If you happen to be doing something so obviously good like the proverbial “curing cancer” then almost everyone would be excited about making it happen. I’ve interviewed at a lot of places over the years and most companies tell a good story in this regard. But their stories tended to be most optimistic interpretations of reality and often spilled into hyperbole. I’ve told these stories myself. And my stories have sold people on joining my companies time and again. But their motivational power tended to wear off after their honeymoon period, which usually lasted just a few months. I feel this is especially true for people with less seniority at larger companies as their impact on the company (and thus the larger purpose that they might care about) is relatively small.

### People and Relationships
This usually takes a while to develop on a team. For a lot of people, especially in the US, some of their most meaningful relationships are the ones they have at work. They don’t want to let their friends down and will work their butts off for the sake of their team. (insert anecdote about Identified here)

### Career Growth
This can be a nice motivator for a lot of people. It’s hard not to appreciate more money, status, praise, etc. Most people I’ve gotten to know have a desire to be recognized in a fair and reasonable way for their contributions. I’ve also seen some people that were content to do the same job competently well year after year and got uncomfortable at the prospect of a promotion with more responsibility. And there have been a handful that were so  driven by the prospect of career growth, that they would work their butts off to make an impact to get themselves noticed. 

I worked this last way for much of my adult life. I’m a little sad looking back at the emptiness of much of my experience. I was an impressive achiever, but there were times when I cared more about how I was perceived than the quality of my work. I cut my share of corners over the years and stretched my interpretation of reality into the ethical grey area on a few occasions. I now look out for people who are a little “too” driven like I was.

### Autonomy
This is a basic human need. This is a big reason why I worked so hard at my own startups. I had near total autonomy in what to do and how to do it and the freedom felt exhilarating. 

I’ve seen people tolerate some restrictions on their autonomy for a time, particularly if they’re getting something else they value in return. Some of those people were content taking on stacks of tickets as long they have control over the how and when of their work. Other’s really needed or want the money and were willing to deal with a lot of BS to feel safe financially. And a bunch cared about getting mentorship from senior team members and were happy to work “under” them for the sake of that relationship. But I haven’t seen anyone that would tolerate serious micromanagement for long. 

My work situations have varied a lot over the years I’ve realized that I need to understand where someone sits on the need for autonomy spectrum relative to what I’m prepared to offer them. I’ve found that not giving people enough autonomy to be a pretty big de-motivator, so I usually default to giving people a ton of it and reigning them in a little if I overshoot their capabilities. 

---

## Hiring for Motivators
For most of my career as a hiring manager, I tried to figure out and reconstruct what motivates a candidate after they've already gone home. The extent of my planning was to hope that over the course of the interviews someone would stumble upon what motivates the candidate. Some interviewers were better than others. This seems silly in retrospect as that’s about the same as hoping I’d accidentally hire someone that would be highly engaged. Hope isn’t a strategy. Fortunately, I’ve been pretty lucky over the years. Instead of deliberately figuring out if someone was likely to be engaged on my team, I focused on creating nurturing environments with enough motivating factors, like giving people a healthy amount of autonomy and opportunities to develop mastery, so that most people were at least somewhat motivated, if not highly driven. But looking back, I wish I had thought about motivation systematically before people joined and thus created even more kick-ass teams. And that’s also what I recommend that you do going forward. I’m talking to you Kevin :)

I’m going to talk through the process that I would use. There’s no magic here and you’re not likely to be surprised, especially if you’ve worked with me before. The hardest part for me would be to do it deliberately and avoid my tendency to take short cuts. This process would be easier if I already had a dozen or more people on my team. But I wouldn’t despair if I didn’t as most of this still would apply to smaller teams, I’d just have to fill in the gaps with my instincts and reevaluate how it’s going later. I’ve actually found that when I adopt any new people process, it helps if I think of it as an experiment whether I have a 60 person org or I’m starting out as a one-man shop. I make some hypotheses upfront (i.e. educated guesses) and then see how well they work out. People are complex. I can’t always predict how they’ll respond. But, I can observe them and learn enough to form a slightly better hypotheses the next time around. 

### PART 1
First, I would look to my existing team and try to understand: what motivates them to do their best work? If my team happened to be small-to-non-existent at the moment, I would think about what motivates me and people I’ve worked with before. If I’ve been managing a team for a few months or more, I would have a good sense of what drives them in the context of our work. And if I didn’t know that, I would probably need to spend more time and energy developing my relationship with each team member and understanding them better. (A post on this is coming soon.)

Figuring out what really motivates people will take some effort. Once I’ve done my homework and reflected on all the different things that motivate my team, I would write them down. This is not an optional step. There’s something about putting thoughts into a structure in the external world that changes how you relate to them. And I’ll want to keep it updated as I learn more over time.

### PART 2
Once I’ve written down my thoughts, I would test for understanding. I would actually go out and talk to my people and make sure I understood them correctly. This is a good practice in general. People are complex and we often make assumptions about what’s driving them on the inside, and we’re often wrong. These might be hard conversations to have if I haven’t been having them all along. I might have to exercise a dose of tact and compassion depending on how open and self aware my team members are and how comfortable they are sharing their private thoughts with me. (anecdote about me vs barzel)

### PART 3
Once I’ve corrected my understanding about my team, I would then translate what motivates the individual team members into the set of motivators that the team could offer to potential candidates and then meet with the team to reach alignment. I’d share what I learned from my personal reflections and private conversations with everyone, and do my best to stay open minded as new ideas can still come up at this point. Though, I’d keep these the personal details confidential and speak in generalities to avoid revealing a sensitive part of someone’s ego. The goal would be to discuss, debate and agree as a team what set of motivators the team or company can offer. I would include the entire team in these conversations, even non-interviewing junior members, so that they’d all understand how we would select candidates and feel more bought into whoever joins the team. Getting alignment and buy-in is a management skill in of itself that I’ll write about soon.

### PART 4
Once we’re in agreement about what to look for, the final step is to figure out how to assess for it. The most important take-away from this step is to come up with clear criteria for what it means for a candidate to have the motivators that I’m looking for.

This is harder than it sounds. Unlike the people on my team that I’ve observed for some time and have a pretty good read on, I usually don’t know my candidates very well. I can’t just flat out ask them about what motivates them and expect to get all the information I need to assess them. Even if people are completely honest, they have blindspots and might not know themselves as well they think they do. 

The advanced technique here would be to use behavioral interviewing as that tends to be the most reliable method for understanding people when done well. I’ve heard this is the way many top executives interview and are interviewed. I’ve read of few books on this topic (see here and here) and had some formal training when I was a Sr Director at Workday. But, unless I had already trained my team on how to do behavioral interviewing for the criteria that we’ve defined, I could simply rely on the few team members that are the best at reading and relating to people in order to have the “motivation” conversation with candidates.

And whatever the criteria was, I’ll probably want to customize it for the type of role that I’m hiring for. As an example, this is how the motivation criteria might have looked for a backend developer role when I was at Clara Lending:

> Developing mastery: Likes the Scala language and/or wants to get really good at it. Doesn’t care about high volume services (1000 loans in a month would be incredible business in this context). Wants to learn all about how to manage a ton of micro-services.

> Social good / purpose: Oddly excited or passionate about mortgages because of some life experience involving home ownership (unlikely, but worth checking anyway).

> People and relationships: Minimum: Not so socially awkward that she would be unable to make friends at work. Ideal: Geeky  in a friendly way that feels relatable to the other engineers. New to the area so has room in her life to form new friendships. Has made meaningful friendships at work in the past.

> Career growth: Has reasonable expectations for seniority and compensation growth over the next couple years. e.g. Doesn’t expect to go from junior to senior engineer in 18 months or get a 30% annual raise (at least not until we’re making real revenue). Comfortable with generic titles that don’t signal rank like “software developer”.

> Autonomy: Has experience working successfully on teams. Comfortable with or open working with a structured process like Scrum, including periodic pair programming and regular code reviews. 

### PART 5
You’ve made it this far, congrats! We’re finally getting to the actual interviews. First I would take our criteria into our conversations with candidates and look for all the motivators that our team could offer. And after we politely grill the candidate, we would follow up and ask their references, too. You check references don’t you? Honestly, I haven’t called them up consistently myself. Most of the time the candidate is the one who gave me the reference and that person has more of a relationship with the candidate than they do with me. They’re almost always reluctant to reveal any negative judgements they might have about the candidate, so it feels like I have to pull some teeth out or squint painfully hard to read between the lines. But they’re much more likely to answer a question like “So, uh, what get’s Joe going on a project?” It’s not a threatening question. I’m asking for more of an observation than an assessment. Everyone has different motivators and I’m simply trying to set Joe up for success by making sure I actually have something to offer that Joe cares about.

### PART 6
Now the fun part — deciding. This is the time for the team to talk about how motivated they believe the candidate would be on the team based on the criteria that we came up with earlier. And if we find ourselves coming up with reasons that don’t line up with our criteria then one of two things might be true. Maybe we’re lying to ourselves. These are typically of the “white” variety that we use to get through life on a regular basis. I try to call myself and my  teammates out when I see it happening. The second possibility is that our criteria is off somehow. This happens to some degree whenever I start a new process. Remember, we said we were going to come up with a hypotheses and this whole thing was going to be an experiment? Well, the point of experiments is to see if we can disprove them. If the criteria isn’t quite working for us, then we should revisit it and revise it. It’s tempting to take shortcuts here: Oh, I’ll just quickly revise this criteria doc and be on my merry way. By then how will our other interviewers find out about the changes? What about the non-interviewing team members that bought into our process? It would probably best if I just went back and redid some of the earlier steps in a light-weight way.


---

<b>S</b>o next time I want recruit people to be driven and engaged, I’ll everyone’s life easier and hire for motivation from the start. I will:

> Come up with _**clear motivation criteria**_ that we could actually deliver on

> Get _**buy-in and alignment**_ from all my team members

> Make _**systematic hiring decisions**_ based on our criteria